###### April 2013

\<div left 45% centeralign\>

```{=html}
<div download>
```
[{{
:applications:egu\_2013.png?250\|}}](http://www2.gi.alaska.edu/snowice/glaciers/iceflow/egu_2013.pdf)

```{=html}
</div>
```
Click the image to get the PDF (4 MB).

```{=html}
</div>
```
\<div right 45%\> \| **Are the simulated climatic and dynamic mass
losses of the Greenland Ice Sheet decoupled during the next 100
years?** \|\| \| **investigators**: \| Guðfinna Aðalgeirsdóttir
and Andy Aschwanden\| \| **conference**: \| [EGU
2013](http://www.egu2013.eu/) \|

```{=html}
</div>
```
`<WRAP clear>`{=html}`</WRAP>`{=html}

\<div left 45%\> Model simulations with the state-of-the-art ice sheet
model PISM (Parallel Ice Sheet Model), that is forced with a number of
climate forcings for the next century are presented. The climate
forcings come from the EU FP7 project ice2sea where 3 regional climate
models (HIRHAM5, MAR and HadRM3P) were used to dynamically downscale two
scenario runs (A1B and E1) from two GCMs (ECHAM5 and HadCM3). These
climate models are run with a constant ice sheet topography and
therefore climate-elevation change feedback not included in the
simulated mass changes.

```{=html}
</div>
```
\<div right 45%\> To assess the sensitivity of the projections to the
ice sheet model initial state, four initialisaton methods were used.
Analyses of these 100 years simulations indicate that the mass changes
due to climate forcing are decoupled from the changes due to dynamic
response and the initialisation procedure. The simulated mass loss has a
relatively large range, 0.5 to 6.5 cm sea level rise equivalent, which
is to a large extent due to the range in the projected climate forcing
from the regional climate models that were used to downscale the climate
fields.

```{=html}
</div>
```
`<WRAP clear>`{=html}`</WRAP>`{=html}
