date: July 2015

\<div left 54%\>

[{{ :applications:deboeretal2015.png?400
\|}}](http://www.the-cryosphere.net/9/881/2015/tc-9-881-2015.html)


\<div right 40%\> \| **[Simulating the Antarctic ice sheet in the
late-Pliocene warm period: PLISMIP-ANT, an ice-sheet model
intercomparison
project](http://www.the-cryosphere.net/9/881/2015/tc-9-881-2015.html)**
\|\| \| **investigator**: \| B. de Boer and others\| \|
**journal**: \| [The
Cryosphere](http://www.the-cryosphere.net/) \|

Understanding the behaviour of ice sheets during warm intervals in Earth
history is of fundamental importance for understanding future climate
change. The late Pliocene warm period (3.264\--3.025 Ma BP) serves as an
analogue for future climates. Although Pliocene ice locations and
extents are still poorly constrained, a significant contribution to
sea-level rise is expected from the Antarctic ice sheets based on
sea-level reconstructions. All six included ice-sheet models in this
paper, including PISM v0.6, used the shallow ice and shelf
approximations for the complete Antarctic domain, including grounded and
floating ice, for both modern control and Pliocene ice sheet runs, in
five sensitivity experiments. The models simulate a comparable
present-day ice sheet, considering the models use their own parameter
settings. For the Pliocene, all six models have difficulty simulating
significant retreat or re-advance of the East Antarctic ice grounding
line, which is thought to have happened for the Wilkes and Aurora
basins. The specific sea-level contribution of the Antarctic ice sheet
at this point cannot be conclusively determined. Improved grounding line
physics is apparently needed.



