###### August 2016 {#august_2016}

\<div left 44%\>

[`{{:applications:pittardetal2016.png?300|}}`{=mediawiki}](http://www.the-cryosphere.net/10/639/2016/)

```{=html}
</div>
```
\<div right 50%\> \| **[Organization of ice flow by localized regions
of elevated geothermal heat
flux](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2016GL068436)** \|\| \|
**investigators**: \| [M. L.
Pittard](http://www.utas.edu.au/geophysics), B. K.
Galton-Fenzi, J. L. Roberts, C. S. Watson\| \| **journal**: \|
[Geophysical Research
Letters](http://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/agu/journal/10.1002/(ISSN)1944-8007/)
\|

Geothermal flux is one input to a thermo-mechanically coupled ice flow
model such as PISM, with significant impact on both ice softness and
basal lubrication. Maps of geothermal flux under present-day ice sheets
come from nontrivial geophysical inversions, based on seismic and/or
magnetic observations, which generate non-unique and (inevitably)
smoothed maps. For example, solutions by Shapiro & Fitzwoller (2004) and
Fox Maule et al (2005) are familiar to Antarctic ice sheet modelers.
However, measurements on ice-free continents show geothermal flux has
strong spatial variations including concentrated highs (hot spots).

A model like PISM can, at least, demonstrate the effects on ice flow of
small-spatial-scale variations in geothermal flux. This paper studies
the Lambert-Amery glacial system in East Antarctica, where a variety of
evidence indicates high heat flux regions of at least 120 mW per square
meter. Localized regions of elevated geothermal flux are tested in PISM
simulations. The results show significant effects on slow-moving ice,
with influence extending both upstream and downstream of the geothermal
anomaly. Fast-moving ice is relatively unaffected. This contrast
suggests that the effect of geothermal flux on ice softness may dominate
the lubrication effect.

```{=html}
</div>
```
`<WRAP clear>`{=html}`</WRAP>`{=html}
