###### March 2016

\<div left 44%\>

[`{{:applications:frieleretal2016.png?350|}}`{=mediawiki}](http://www.earth-syst-dynam.net/7/203/2016/)

```{=html}
</div>
```
\<div right 50%\> \| **[Delaying future sea-level rise by storing
water in
Antarctica](http://www.earth-syst-dynam.net/7/203/2016/)**
\|\| \| **investigator**: \| [K.
Frieler](https://www.pik-potsdam.de/members/frieler), M.
Mengel, and A. Levermann\| \| **journal**: \| [Earth System
Dynamics](http://www.earth-system-dynamics.net/index.html) \|

This paper uses PISM to estimate the time-scale on which the East
Antarctic ice sheet (EAIS) can be used as temporary storage of the
ocean. The geoengineering goal of such an action would be to reduce sea
level everywhere by reducing global ocean volume. The ice dynamics
modeling aspect of this investigation suggests that the time-scale
before the EAIS starts to \"put back\" the water, by accelerated flow
into the ocean, is shorter than the pure advection result using
present-day velocities would suggest. That is, under the schemes tested,
a significant kinematic wave propagates faster than the interior ice
flow speed. It alters flow rates at the margin through steepening, and
this shortens the effective storage time. (The ice delivered at the
margin is not the sea water put into the interior.) While ice flow
modeling is part of the analysis here, engineering, economic, and
ethical factors are also examined. The analysis suggests, for example,
that a terawatt of (non-fossil-fuel!) electricity generation
capacity\--perhaps wind turbines\--would be needed to drive pumps to
lift the water kilometers vertically and hundreds of kilometers inland.

Geoengineering is a loaded term, of course. Once mentioned, effort is
needed to separate the \"should\" from the \"could\" of geoengineering
proposals. In any case, this paper shows ice sheet models surely
contribute to answering science questions with societal and political
impacts. See also press releases by the [Potsdam
Institute](https://www.pik-potsdam.de/news/press-releases/sea-level-rise-too-big-to-be-pumped-away)
and [Columbia
University](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2016/03/10/pump-meltwater-back-on-antarctica-do-you-have-850000-wind-turbines/),
as well as articles in
[Newsweek](http://www.newsweek.com/geoengineering-wont-save-us-sea-level-rise-435311),
the [Washington
Post](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/03/10/this-mind-boggling-study-shows-just-how-massive-sea-level-rise-really-is/),
and the [Christian Science
Monitor](http://www.csmonitor.com/Science/2016/0310/Can-we-slow-sea-level-rise-by-pumping-water-onto-Antarctica),
among other places.

```{=html}
</div>
```
`<WRAP clear>`{=html}`</WRAP>`{=html}
