date: November 2017

\<div left 44%\>

[`{{:applications:habermannetal2017.png?350|}}`{=mediawiki}](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-glaciology/article/error-sources-in-basal-yield-stress-inversions-for-jakobshavn-isbrae-greenland-derived-from-residual-patterns-of-misfit-to-observations/37C15ECD8F11F90C05A7FFC1F738D801)


\<div right 50%\> \| **[Error sources in basal yield stress inversions
for Jakobshavn Isbr√¶, Greenland, derived from residual patterns of
misfit to
observations](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-glaciology/article/error-sources-in-basal-yield-stress-inversions-for-jakobshavn-isbrae-greenland-derived-from-residual-patterns-of-misfit-to-observations/37C15ECD8F11F90C05A7FFC1F738D801)**
\|\| \| **investigators**: \| [M.
Habermann](http://glaciers.gi.alaska.edu/people/habermann)
and others\| \| **journal**: \| [J.
Glaciol.](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-glaciology)
\|

Glaciologists know little about the conditions at the beds of glaciers
because these places are so hard to observe directly. Nonetheless most
PISM runs need and use a model of the basal conditions. This includes a
model of the basal topography, derived from ice-penetrating radar
(though necessarily more than the \"raw\" reflections), and a model of
the relation between basal sliding velocity and shear stress (e.g. a
power law with uncertain parameters).

Inverse modeling can examine the relationship between available surface
observations and the conditions at the base. This paper assesses the
intermediate quantities in an inverse modeling exercise. Such a
calculation generates a (forward) model result for which a norm of the
difference between the observations and the model result is minimized in
some sense. This difference itself, the residual, contains information
which is lost in computing its norm. These authors examine the residual,
and other quantities as well, for meaning. There are several types of
errors in glaciological inverse modeling which generates basal shear
stress. These include observation errors (in the surface elevation and
velocity), geometry errors, ice temperature errors, and \"model
errors\". The last are particularly interesting in the PISM context; a
question addressed by this paper is \"what are the manifestations of the
simplifications in PISM in the sense of residual features?\" A
particular focus is on the difference between upstream and near-terminus
regions of a deep-trough outlet glacier in the Greenland ice sheet.



