###### September 2017

\<div left 46%\>

[`{{:applications:golledgeetal2017cp.png?350|}}`{=mediawiki}](https://doi.org/10.5194/cp-13-959-2017)

```{=html}
</div>
```
\<div right 48%\> \| **[Antarctic climate and ice-sheet configuration
during the early Pliocene interglacial at 4.23
Ma](https://doi.org/10.5194/cp-13-959-2017)** \|\| \|
**investigators**: \| [N.
Golledge](http://www.victoria.ac.nz/antarctic/about/staff/nick-golledge)
and others\| \| **journal**: \| [Climate of the
Past](https://www.climate-of-the-past.net/index.html) \|

Whether a \"tipping point\" will be reached in the next few centuries,
in the dynamics of various parts of the Antarctic ice sheet (AIS) as it
responds to a warming world, is the most difficult prediction question.
It is an extreme challenge to models. How complete a model must be, so
as to resolve the relevant behavior of the (real) dynamical system, is
unknown. A negative result from modeling (i.e. no tipping points seen in
model runs) has minimal value because a more-complete, or merely
different, model may show a tipping point. Insisting that a model
include all possibly-relevant mechanisms is unfeasible to the point of
silliness.

Tipping-point questions can be asked about the past states of the AIS,
though using existing observations to resolve these questions is
extraordinarily difficult. This paper uses GCM/RCM and ice-sheet
modeling to recreate conditions of the early to mid-Pliocene when
atmospheric CO2 concentrations were similar to present day. The focus of
PISM application is on modeling grounding-line motion, ice shelf basal
melt near the grounding line, and basal sliding. A novel method here,
relative to other AIS modeling literature, is an autocorrelation
analysis of time series for (modeled) ice mass to find early-warning
signs of impending tipping points. A precursor to tipping-point-type
destabilization, proximately by classic marine-based ice-sheet retreat,
appears to be prolonged surface lowering in response to warm air
temperatures.

```{=html}
</div>
```
`<WRAP clear>`{=html}`</WRAP>`{=html}
