---
title: The 100th PISM-using paper!
image: /img/news/pism-publications.png
---

At the end of May we found the 100th PISM-using paper:

> L. B. Stap, J. Sutter, G. Knorr, M. St√§rz, G. Lohmann (2019) *Transient
Variability of the Miocene Antarctic Ice Sheet Smaller Than Equilibrium
Differences*. Geophysical Research Letters 46 (8) pp. 4288--4298

See [the publications page](:publications) for a
complete-as-far-as-we-know list of the first 100 published PISM
applications, back to the first one in 2007.

We find PISM-using papers by following citations, so there may be others
out there we do not know about. Authors who want to help us keep track
should follow the advice at [the acknowledgments
documentation](https://github.com/pism/pism/blob/master/ACKNOWLEDGE.rst).

Here is one view of the PISM papers, sorted by the not-to-be-trusted
"journal impact factor" of the journals in which they appear:

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](/img/news/pism-journals.png){:width="50%"}
{: refdef}

The most popular five journals for PISM papers are *The Cryosphere*,
*Journal of Glaciology*, *Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth
Surface*, *Nature*, and *Geophysical Research Letters*; excellent
journals all. (Figuring-out the rest of journal abbreviations is an
exercise for the reader.)

It is interesting to note that only 22% of PISM-using publications have
a UAF-based co-author:

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](/img/news/pism-uaf-publications.png){:width="50%"}
{: refdef}

PISM is a tool used throughout the world by scientists needing an ice
sheet model, whether or not they have a connection to the UAF
developers. So we appreciate NASA and NSF support here at UAF, which has
always made our open-source release model possible. We continue to push
PISM development in a variety of directions, and we look forward to
seeing the next 100 PISM papers!

See also [this GI
write-up](https://www.gi.alaska.edu/news/ice-sheet-model-reaches-100th-publication-benchmark).
