###### What would happen in Antarctica if all fossil fuels are burned? {#what_would_happen_in_antarctica_if_all_fossil_fuels_are_burned}

A new open-access [paper by Ricarda Winkelmann and
others](http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/1/8/e1500589)
uses PISM to address an admittedly extreme question: If all
currently-attainable fossil fuel resources are converted to atmospheric
greenhouse gases, what happens to the Antarctic Ice Sheet?

This paper\'s model-based answer is that serious destruction of the ice
sheet occurs in the first millenium, at about 3 m sea level rise per
century. Such a large mass loss rate tails off in the two following
millenia. The large losses come from a combination of marine-ice-sheet
instability and surface elevation versus mass balance feedback, both of
which are modeled effects in PISM. However, in the first century of the
simulations there are the same relatively-modest AIS mass changes as
seen in other recent modeling work, because dynamic losses driven by
increasing ocean temperatures are partly offset by increasing snowfall.

Here is a quick methods summary, with more detail found in the paper and
its supplementary material: Emission scenarios, CO2 concentrations, and
global mean temperature pathways are combined in an Earth system model
and then downscaled to surface and ocean temperature anomalies for
Antarctica. These regional warming scenarios are then used to force
PISM, in particular using its positive-degree-day scheme to model
surface melt and a three-equation model for subshelf melting.

US National Public Radio featured the paper, including comments by
co-author Ken Caldeira, [on the 11 September edition of All Things
Considered](http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2015/09/11/439538952/what-would-happen-if-we-burned-up-all-of-earths-fossil-fuels),
as did the [New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/12/science/climate-study-predicts-huge-sea-level-rise-if-all-fossil-fuels-are-burned.html).
